Sometimes, all of the information
that comes crashing into our lives is simply overwhelming.
For some of you, it may even leave you depressed.
No doubt, there is indeed a lot to consider these days.
As an antidote to all of the seriousness,
one woman has decided we need a good laugh at ourselves,
and has taken it on as her life's work
to do spiritually incorrect comedy.
Although deeply spiritual by nature,
Vanda Mikoloski believes laughter is another path to God.
(mid-tempo jazz instrumental)
How did you end up
being an enlightenment comedian,
showing at events such as the "What the bleep" conferences
and that, and nonetheless, you say you're a bad girl,
you're a naughty girl sometimes, at the same time.
Let's get into your whole history,
and how you link naughty girl with enlightenment,
and now you're on stage.
Oh, my gosh. That's a lot.
Yeah.
Yeah!
How to begin?
Well, I've always loved the ideas of, you know,
what are we doing here?
Why are we here?
What is this trap called the human predicament?
Is it a trap?
Are we just these mechanistic entities,
linear, temporal, designed to survive
and then die?
Or, is there something other?
And I've always pondered that.
I was raised in strict Roman Catholicism.
That gave me something that was dogmatic
and not inclusive of other belief systems,
for me to consider other belief systems, you know?
Then, you know when you're a kid,
how you just marvel at things?
My brother and I, we had plenty of nature around us,
and we could just lie in fields and wonder,
you know, at the awesome magnificence of all of it.
And I always knew, I think kids kinda know,
that that patriarchal, punitive God figure
that they were telling me was the creator
and intelligence behind all this, just didn't really,
you know, that didn't fit.
So I set out on a journey.
I had a rebellious older brother,
we did drugs from a really early age.
So I did acid at around 11.
My brain was so clean that I had a great little acid trip,
and saw that I was one with everything.
And I don't recommend it for all you 11 year olds out there,
But it was a sensation, or a sensibility,
that I chased my whole life after that.
It's like, what is that unity that I know is there?
And you never get that sense of
"I am whole, complete and perfect", and then forget it.
No matter if you're tripping, or not.
I just knew, oh my god, my parents have been misinformed.
They think there's something awry, and there isn't.
I'm perfect.
So, there was that, and then just growing up,
and watching societal systems,
and you see in the background,
like in the wallpaper of education, religion, everything.
Don't be you, because you suck.
You know, that's like everywhere in the background.
In almost any system we have,
any of the largely male-dominated systems that work...
Not working, you know?
And there's that don't be you because you suck, thing.
Well, it keeps the money flowing.
Yeah.
If you suck, you have to keep buying more
to bolster yourself.
How won't I suck?
(laughing) Right.
How much is that gonna cost? Right, exactly.
So, you know, there's that amazing thing in comedy.
A lot of comics come from despair,
and depression and pain, and suffering and all that.
And enlightenment, similar thing.
If you notice, the guys like Eckhart Tolle or Byron Katie,
they all hit that point where they were one step away
from suicidal despair and one step away from enlightenment,
and they went that way.
Some of us played on the edges
of the threshold of sanity for a while,
you know, and anesthetized ourselves.
I did.
Well, you did. Yeah, and that was in New York,
in the early days in comedy?
Yeah.
Yeah. And so I was anesthetizing myself,
very self-destructive behavior,
but hanging out with some really interesting and fun people.
And the body was so resilient in my 20s, you know?
So there's that.
But at some point, you know,
like my boyfriend, Eckhart Tolle, says,
all addictions begin with pain and ultimately end with pain.
The middle part can be really, really fun though.
I'll tell you, it can be really fun.
Just that part alone, that's really fun.
And it does end with a pain,
and at some point, I said, why am I killing myself?
At about age 40, I said, why am I...
Like, the idea that there might be an issue
underneath all of this stuff that I'm anesthetizing.
I just one day said, oh, I'm not...
Maybe I'm not just a self-destructive jerk who's...
completely irresponsible.
Maybe I'm anesthetizing
something I don't wanna see in myself.
Something I don't wanna feel.
You know, and I started doing a lot of work,
a lot of spiritual work, transformational work,
and I got to...
One of the core things
in my mechanistic knee-jerk personality
is, you know, my brother, who was the love of my life,
died when I was 13.
And then my dad died.
He drowned,
and then my dad died in a car accident a few years later.
Drug-related, alcohol-related.
And I just developed early on,
this defensiveness about,
I don't want my heart to get broken anymore.
I don't want to feel that kind of pain anymore.
And so I lived my whole life doing that.
Here I am, 48, not married,
but not by my own choice.
Single.
And so I'm just, at 40, I just for the last eight years
I've been working out some of those issues
that have had me protecting myself for so long.
And you really,
you've thrown yourself into it at times, too.
You were with Ramtha, right?
Mm-hmm.
Spent a good amount of time with her.
And you were saying off camera,
you're listening to every audio tape and CD in the car,
going here and there, so you were really searching.
Yeah.
This wasn't a passive thing for you.
Mm-mm. No, I love having those ah-has.
They're my favorite things.
Second only to ha-has.
Ha-has, right.
What did the ah-has do to your ha-has, by the way?
During that period of time.
Did you become like a lot of people
that enter into this search, the journey,
was it a very sobering thing for you?
And did you come out laughing?
Or were you laughing all the way through?
I found the funny people.
You know, you just find each other.
I was...
Sometimes, in spiritual circles,
people can get pretty sacrosanct, you know?
And just replace the old religious observances
with the new spiritual disciplines,
and the old religious hierarchy
with the new gurus or whatever.
And it's just the same, more of the same thing.
Mistaking the path for the power.
And I have a, my coach,
I have a coach and an ex-boyfriend who says,
"Nothing works.
"Nothing works. It's all intention."
It's all what you do, you know?
So you can have your crystals or your this or your that,
and you're going to those conscious life expos,
and there's thousands of things, you know?
Gurus, teachers, whatever.
I think you have to actually
see the hypocrisy in a few gurus,
get completely-- feel betrayed by them, forgive them,
and then maybe get on your spiritual path.
(laughing) Right.
Give your power away to them completely.
Right.
You know? So I've done a lot of that.
Yeah, I think most people,
probably most people watching this,
have done exactly the same thing as well.
Yeah.
You know, we tend to want to hang on to something
while we're looking at this in-between place in life.
And so you were...
One of the things I was intrigued with
was your whole journey with Ramtha.
What was that like for you?
What were you there for?
What were you getting out of all of that?
Well, Ramtha was the first time
I had heard a cosmology
that there is no ultimate duality in the universe.
And I loved that.
And that goes back to when you were a kid,
when you had your little trip.
Yeah.
When you knew you were one with everything.
So was she the next time you hooked in with that,
many years later?
Yeah.
I remember actually lying in a field with my brother,
and saying, there has to be...
No one's telling us the truth.
They're pretending that they know the truth,
and they're putting information down our throats,
and saying this is the truth, believe this.
But none of it explains the vast magnificence of this.
There has to be like a genie,
like a someone.
Someone who knows.
There has to be someone who knows.
You know, and just wishing for that.
And then when Ramtha came along,
there was a couple of supernormal things that happened
that had my ears perk up.
You know, I had never had supernormal experiences before.
And then, I was living in New York City.
My brother hands me an audio tape, says
"This is a multi-dimensional entity.
"If you call him into your life..."
Him being the 35,000 year old warrior
who is allegedly channeled by J. Z. Knight,
I don't know what's going on, who knows?
But there's something remarkable there.
And so he said,
"If you call him into your life, he'll appear."
And I'm like, yeah, right, whatever.
And so, I'm a waitress on 72nd and...
What was it?
Hamburger, Diane's Hamburgers in New York.
And I go, all right, okay Ramtha,
if you're really there, come into my life, right?
And that day, two guys walk in the restaurant.
I was singing. I go,
♫ I need love, love, to help me ease my mind ♫
And they go, and I turn around and go, oh!
Did you come in to see me, or did you come to eat?
And they go, oh, we came in to see you.
And it was just like that kind of fun communication.
And I said, well, we're not open yet,
but just sit down, and I'll get to you.
And so I walked up, and I said, isn't that funny,
how when you're in a good mood,
everyone around you seems to be in a good mood.
And this guy goes,
"Consciousness is boss."
I go, have you ever heard of Ramtha?
And he goes, "Ramtha's my guru."
And I went, oh my god, oh my god!
One of those, oh my god!
I called him into my life this morning! Very skeptically!
And look, you know?
And so, that was way cool.
This guy and I, he was a musician.
We started seeing each other.
We opened for each other, and that was really cool.
And several other remarkable things like that happened,
and I'm like, I gotta pay some attention.
There's something waking me up here.
I don't know what it is.
Is it Ramtha?
Is there some power outside myself? Is it me?
Does Ramtha even exist,
or is it just a consciousness that I create
by perceiving it?
Right.
Yeah.
Right. So what happened from that point,
that took you deeper into all of it?
Well, I left New York City,
at the height of my little career there.
I was an emcee at Catch A Rising Star,
dating Bill Maher at the time.
You were dating Bill Maher?
Yes, yeah.
Okay, that's a little,
I don't know if we can talk about that on camera,
but I might just have to ask you a bit about that.
Okay, go ahead.
Yeah, and everyone thought I was crazy,
but I really thought,
I'm gonna choose my spiritual life and go out there.
My brother said, "You can create whatever you want,
"wherever you are."
And I went, hmm.
That's one of those pivotal things an elder tells you,
or something, you know?
I went, okay.
I'll create whatever I want in the Pacific Northwest.
And one thing led to the next,
and I'm completely smitten by this teacher.
He was brilliant.
I mean, whatever that entity was
that was coming out of J. Z. Knight.
I sat in lectures where, you know, six hours,
taking four or five different streams of thought,
and then weaving them together at the end with no script,
it was just like...
And having them impact you on a-- dimensionally,
like, experientially.
And everyone having the same experience around you.
It's like, hmm, there's something going on here, you know?
Anyway, so I stayed in that school for a long time.
And then this urge to create.
I started doing work at, transformational work
at Landmark Education.
And this urge to go out
and really make a difference in the world.
The Ramtha school is really Yelm-centric,
and a lot of people, their paradigm is them and their god.
Sitting, doing their disciplines,
and it doesn't include as much community
as much as I like.
I like to think about the difference I'm here to make
on the planet.
You know, and so that's what I'm doing.
You know, I'm funny, I love ha-has, and I love ah-has,
and I thought, why don't I bring them together?
It's never been done before quite like this.
No, you're very irreverent.
But the thing is, what's so wonderful about it
is that's what gets people to think about it.
And not only that, it gets people to chill out
about their own,
what they perceive as all those inadequacies, right?
Oh, yeah.
And the spiritually incurrent comics I'm working with,
we're all just filthy.
Nasty. Human, just human as hell.
And it's so good. We curse like truck drivers.
But you know what?
If you can't curse in front of spiritual people,
who can you curse in front of, is what I say.
But no, we're really, that's what's fun about us,
is we're looking at...
Like, holy people are just not that interesting.
Good people are just not that interesting.
And they're not gonna transform the planet.
They're not!
Because they'll never access Joe or Mary, you know?
They'll never access those people.
Those people will never find themselves in that person
and who they're being, you know?
Like, the more I can access my own humanity,
the more I can cop to being a jerk,
the more I can admit,
I'm a liar, a cheat, a whore and a thief,
you know what I mean?
Like today, today I just sent someone an email,
that was giving them advice that they didn't ask for.
And then I sent them an email back,
and I said, I'm sorry, I just gave you unsolicited advice.
All of a sudden, the whole world opens up
between me and this person.
And I'm vulnerable, and I'm just human.
Oops, I gave unsolicited advice.
That's what I do sometimes,
and that's not what I want to do with you, you know?
Yeah.
Sweet.
Well, it's interesting, because looking at some of the--
I've been to your website, obviously.
And looking at what some of the people have to say about it,
you're really making a difference in their lives.
You're allowing them to open up into concepts
that might be a little hairy and uncomfortable,
simply because you are a person, a real person.
Yeah.
And it lets other people see themselves
as not so flawed, after all.
Or if I'm flawed, we're all flawed.
Yeah. Yeah.
So the sense of the seeking of perfection
is really not part of what you're doing, here.
I have done that seeking of perfection,
and I am pretty harsh on myself sometimes, but--
But you're already perfect.
Yeah, I know, see? Isn't it crazy?
And so am I, so are all of us.
I know.
Let's talk about this whole, this trend,
a larger trend that's going on.
It's going on, well, you mentioned Bill Maher,
and off-camera, I had asked you your thoughts
about Jon Stewart and Stephen Colbert and all that.
What happens in a situation like this?
We're in a country that is, for all intents and purposes,
objectively, doing a big skid.
We're slipping into some real crises.
Across the board.
It doesn't really matter which page you open up
on the paper,
there are some challenges ahead.
We go to the comedy acts at night that do the news,
we go to Jon Stewart, we go to Stephen Colbert,
and we release a lot of that tension
with a good laugh about our President and others.
What's your philosophical view of that?
What do we do with this energy
that really on one hand,
we really need to have change happen.
On the other, we want to just kinda chill and laugh about it
and spend that in that way.
What do we do?
Yeah. Yeah.
It's a bit of a conundrum.
Yeah. And you know, the whole...
I would say I would identify with the more liberal
progressive kind of politics,
and at the same time,
in fact, I was a peace activist,
staunchly against the war.
Staunchly against war, period. As a way of...
Right.
I mean, it just seems a little absurd to me,
that we are as sophisticated as we are,
and that we still actually take out little guns
and shoot at each other.
I mean, that is, like, weird to me.
I agree.
And so,
the resistance, the comedy resistance to that,
in some ways, strengthens it.
It makes it two positions, you know?
So I don't know. I don't know.
It's nothing
that's too strong to withstand...
I mean, it's nothing strong enough
to withstand transformation of the planet,
which is what I'm interested in.
Transformation of consciousness,
such that we render war obsolete.
You know, I'm really interested in that,
and I know a lot of people
who are really interested in that.
And so,
it sort of takes the righteousness of my peace activism,
and makes that a waste of my time, you know?
Like I've been very angry.
I've been a pissed activist, not peace.
A pissed activist.
And I know that being right about how wrong things are
will never, ever make a difference on this planet.
Never have. Never has, and never will.
And that's not the energy that will make a difference.
There's something really female that will make a difference,
and I can't, I don't wanna be, like, so la-la-la,
I'm female, I'm better than you,
but there's really, because it's female-male.
It has to be both, you know?
But there's something in that Mother's Day proclamation
that just gets me in my soul,
you know what I'm talking about?
The Mother's Day proclamation that Louisa May Alcott wrote,
I think it was?
And it was just about,
there's something women have a knowledge of in their core,
because we're nurturers and that's what we do,
that gets...
almost enraged by where the men have taken the society.
And I'm not saying we're victims,
because we volunteered to be second class citizens.
No one did that to us.
And I know there'll be a lot of women disagreeing.
Hey, we incarnated, we're here.
Yeah. Well, that's, yeah.
Someone said, do you wanna try this?
Believe that you're a second class citizen,
and really believe it,
and then try to work your way out of it.
Won't that be fun?
Okay, that sounds good, yeah!
Yeah.
You know?
And yet, at the same time, we're born in an era
where we're to bring that presence back,
and that's to be part of the guiding force into,
the guiding light, shall we say,
into whatever we're giving birth to here.
Whether it be through laughter, through anger
or whatnot.
Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah, there's a balance and a beauty, and it's like,
I was walking by the Vietnam memorial not too long ago,
and looking at all the names.
It was an anniversary, so they were saying the names too,
so it was multimedia, and I'm like,
if you take the morality out of it, and the duality,
the right and the wrong out of it,
you're just like, hmm.
As a species, look what we've done.
It's creative, killing people, that's creative.
Everything's creative.
You know, everything is, you're doing something,
it's creating something.
But look what we could create.
You know, if you take, really take the morality out of it,
the right and wrong out of it.
Hmm, we've killed a lot of people.
Just like, spiders take a fly and wrap it up
and suck out its insides or whatever.
It's like, if you take the duality,
the right or wrong out of that,
you think, huh, I wonder how many more eons we'll do that,
before we come up with something a little more interesting.
You know, a little more fun or creative.
Yeah, it's getting to be an old story.
So looking at all of these stories,
what to you is one of the most...
What are some of the absurdities about human nature
that you really like to get on in your acts?
The whole notion of, you know, peace, love, harmony,
oneness and so forth.
Okay? Where do you really go?
What do you find really ironic or absurd about all of us?
You talking about the angel and dolphin crowd?
There you go. Whatever.
I call them the angel and dolphin crowd.
Yeah, that you can't be good without being bad.
You can't be good without accepting your badness,
you know what I mean?
Like, that's something I really harp on onstage,
because I was, like,
my personality was rebellious.
I was a bad girl, you know.
So I love to include that.
I have to admit right upfront
that I don't feel like I'm spiritual enough.
Like, you ever feel like that?
Like, I don't know.
All my spiritual friends, they're raising their energy
from their lower chakras
up to their heart chakra.
My first chakra is like my favorite chakra so far.
(audience laughter)
Do you know what I mean? I love that chakra.
The others are nice, but I really like that one.
(audience laughter)
I have a line in my act where I say,
I quote John Lennon.
I say, John Lennon, the great Beatle, said,
"We are all Hitler, we are all Jesus Christ."
Now, I do think it's the ratio that counts,
is my little line.
But people say, don't say that! Don't say that!
Because some people just--
Or I say, I'm a liar, a cheat, a tramp and a thief.
And they go, you're not that.
I'm like, yes, I am.
But you're not that anymore!
You've evolved past that, haven't you?
No, you're a liar, too.
You just haven't done the work. Just look.
You're probably a cheat and a thief,
I don't know what you are,
but the flavor of your humanness, look.
Keep looking, you'll find it. It's in there, you know?
But it's like, the people who want to think positive,
the only reason they're thinking that way
is because they're really negative.
Do you know what I mean? There's that whole duality.
When you really have to push toward that.
Yeah.
Yeah, and...
So you're saying that there's an inherent lack
of acceptance of one's other side,
if you're only putting forth a positive face.
Yeah. We can't-- and then whatever we resist in another,
we strengthen in ourselves.
Like, so there's certain things
I can't be with in other people, you know?
And then, mastering that art of going,
where am I that way?
Hmm, because it looks like them, it doesn't look like me.
Or I do a more sophisticated version of that.
Or something, you know?
Yeah, I can't look like that.
Yeah, yeah.
Well, what was it like with two comedians together?
Can you tell us a little bit,
without getting too personal, of course,
about your journey with Bill Maher,
and that time together?
Bill Maher was great. A strict disciplinarian.
He was like, "I want you to do good comedy,
"I don't want you to do typically female comedy."
Because women sometimes, in comedy,
take a point of view where they're disempowered,
and they rally favor with the women in the audience
in order to, they curry favor with the women in the audience
in order to get agreement on a point of view.
Victim.
Yeah! So he encouraged me never to write female comedy,
to always write experientially as a human being,
you know, and some of that's female.
But, and to not, you know, like women tend to generalize,
men are like this.
No! The guy that I saw was like this.
Or something like that, you know?
So he was really strict about that.
Too strict sometimes, my girlfriends got mad at him.
But he was a great, he held the bar really high for me
when I was just starting out in comedy.
So it sounds like he was a really wonderful mentor.
Absolutely.
And he sounds absolutely brilliant, too.
He's brilliant, yeah! Brilliant.
And a lot of heart?
Yeah. Yeah, he's got a deep...
You know, some people would disagree.
But we went to see the movie,
what was that movie with the alien?
Which one? That one that pops out of the chest, or...
No, no. No, no.
You know, the 80s movie.
"E.T."
Oh, "E.T."
"E.T."! And, you know, Bill cried.
Now a friend of mine said he cried because he wasn't in it.
No, I think when somebody is that, as we see him today,
when someone's that angrily trying to get their point across
that's usually because there's a really broken heart
underneath all of that.
Do you find that with comedians in general?
Oh, now you're being all Barbara Walters on me. (laughs)
I'm sorry! Well, seriously.
Well, not seriously, okay?
Yeah. Yeah.
Oh, I think we're all walking wounded, you know?
And that oftentimes, people who make it to fame
are so driven by an unconscious perception
of themselves as, I mean, why would anyone do that?
Crawl through the ladder of this hierarchical town
in order to stand on the top of the trash heap
we call Hollywood,
and reflect culture back to itself.
Why would anyone be driven to do that?
There has to be, like, I don't know,
overcompensation for some perceived lack,
or something like that.
You know, I don't know.
Very rarely is it because I care to contribute
to my fellow men, you know, and women.
I don't know.
But you do now.
That is what you're doing now, isn't it?
Actually, you know, now it is.
Now it is, and...
Yeah, I didn't wanna be in nightclubs again.
And then, when my brother was involved
with the movie "What The Bleep Do We Know",
I decided, if I could really--
FIrst of all, I thought about my life
as Eckhart Tolle talks about it,
this little dash between the year of your birth
and the year of your death on your gravestone.
And if you think about that, I want a kick-ass hyphen.
You know, I want a hyphen that's really great.
You know, and so do I want to be on my deathbed going,
you know, I never really fulfilled that dream in Hollywood
that I just loved, I loved comedy.
I mean, when I work with my other comedians,
we get together, the "Spiritually Incorrect" comedians,
and we just revel in the, how to turn a phrase.
It's just so much fun. The technique of comedy itself.
And the edge of it, and what it expresses.
It's just delightful for us.
So I love comedy, I love making people laugh.
I love laughing myself. I love the edge of truth.
And I love that
there's something very spiritual in laughing.
Like my old guru Ramtha used to say,
"Whatever you can't laugh at owns you."
You know, so you look at, none of us,
me and my comics, we're not sacred,
reverent about anything.
I haven't found a threshold yet.
It's this funny thing, this whole enlightened eating thing.
I was at Whole Foods not too long ago,
and I'm standing in front of the egg selection, right?
And I'm looking at all the vast array of eggs.
It's mind-boggling, right?
There's, like, crappy cheap eggs from caged hens,
you know, just resentful passive-aggressive,
here's your damn egg, yeah, take it!
(audience laughter)
I mean, life is hell!
And then there's cage-free,
and then there's another distinction, free-range,
and then there's another distinction beyond that
which is fully self-realized.
(audience laughter)
They're like, you know what?
These eggs are like, I came first!
(audience laughter)
And then there's another distinction.
The ones I like, I really like the eggs
that actually had crappy circumstances, they were caged,
but they weren't victims of their circumstance.
Right? Right?
(audience laughing and cheering)
Yeah, they saw the movie "The Secret",
they made their little vision board
with whatever newspaper they could find
and then they focused with conscious intention
out of their little stupid chicken brain,
and the universe, the quantum field spun itself
around their little stupid chicken brain intention,
and they were free, you know?
That's what I, they're like 12 dollars a dozen,
but they're great with bacon.
(audience laughter)
Yum! L'Chaim!
Vanda is a total firecracker.
To check out her performance dates,
or to watch some of her work online,
just click on the link below.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.
(mid-tempo jazz instrumental)